Vocal patterns in infants with Autism Spectrum Disorder:
Canonical babbling status and vocalization frequency
Elena Patten, Ph.D.1, Katie Belardi, M.S.2, Grace T. Baranek, Ph.D.2, Linda R. Watson, Ed.D.
2, Jeffrey D. Labban, Ph.D.1, and D. Kimbrough Oller, Ph.D.3
1Univ.
of North Carolina, Greensboro
2Univ.
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
3Univ.
of Memphis, and Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research,
Klosterneuburg, Austria
Abstract
Canonical babbling is a critical milestone for speech development and is usually well in place by
10 months.
The possibility that infants with ASD show late onset of canonical babbling has so far
eluded evaluation.
Rate of vocalization or “volubility” has also been suggested as possibly
aberrant in infants with ASD.
We conducted a retrospective video study examining vocalizations
of 37 infants at 9–12 and 15–18 months.
Twenty-three of the 37 infants were later diagnosed with
ASD and indeed produced low rates of canonical babbling and low volubility by comparison with
the 14 typically developing infants.
The study thus supports suggestions that very early vocal
patterns may prove to be a useful component of early screening and diagnosis of ASD.
Keywords
canonical babbling; volubility; vocal patterns; early detection
ASD and early vocal development
Early intervention is critical for positive outcomes for children with Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD).
Early identification of atypical behaviors that manifest during infancy
could significantly impact age of diagnosis and subsequent initiation of intervention.
Currently, the minimum age at which the majority of children with ASD can be reliably
diagnosed with relative stability is two years (e.g., Chawarska et al., 2009; Lord, 1995), but
according to recent data from the Centers for Disease Control, many children are not
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to: Elena Patten.
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 300
Ferguson Building, P. O.
Box 26170, Greensboro, NC 27402-6170. e_patten@uncg.edu.
Elena Patten, UNC Greensboro, 300 Ferguson Building, Greensboro, NC 27412-6170
Katie Belardi, UNC Chapel Hill, Bondurant Hall, CB#7190, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7190
Grace Baranek, UNC Chapel Hill, Bondurant Hall, CB #7122, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7190
Linda Watson, UNC Chapel Hill, Bondurant Hall, CB#7190, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7190
Jeffrey Labban, UNC Greensboro, 231 HHP Building, Greensboro, NC 27412
D. Kimbrough Oller, The University of Memphis, 807 Jefferson Avenue, Memphis, TN 38105
Elena Patten and Jeffrey Labban are at UNC Greensboro in North Carolina, USA; Katie Belardi, Grace Baranek and Linda Watson are
at UNC Chapel Hill in North Carolina, USA; D. Kimbrough Oller is at the University of Memphis in Tennessee, USA.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Autism Dev Disord.
2014 October ; 44(10): 2413–2428.
doi:10.1007/s10803-014-2047-4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
diagnosed until preschool or kindergarten age (2012).
Research targeting early detection has
primarily focused on behaviors exhibited during toddlerhood (12–36 months) and preschool
years (36–60 months) (e.g., Matson, Fodstad, & Dempsey, 2009; Volkmar & Chawarska,
2008) after diagnosis has been made.
Use of retrospective video analyses and studies of
infant siblings of children diagnosed with ASD has allowed examination of possible
indicators of ASD in the first year of life (e.g., Baranek, 1999; Osterling, Dawson, &
Munson, 2002; Sheinkopf, Iverson, Rinaldi, & Lester, 2012; Zwaigenbaum et al., 2005).
Still, the most widely used autism screening tool for young children, the Modified Checklist
for Autism Toddlers (MCHAT: Robins, Fein, Barton, & Green, 2001) is recommended for
ages 16–30 months.
We sought to identify potential communication markers of ASD that might be observed
within the first year of life in a retrospective evaluation of data from infants recorded at
home and later diagnosed with ASD.
We focused on presumed precursors to language for
two reasons: First, communication impairment is a core deficit in ASD, and second,
evaluation of very early vocal behaviors in typically developing infants has already
established markers that are critical to normal vocal communicative development.
One
robust pre-speech vocal milestone is the onset of canonical babbling.
A canonical syllable
(e.g., ) is comprised of a consonant-like sound and a vowel-like sound, with a rapid
transition between them (Oller, 1980, 2000).
A second potentially important vocal measure
that we considered is volubility, the rate of infant vocalization independent of vocal type
(Nathani, Lynch, & Oller, 1999; Obenchain, Menn, & Yoshinaga-Itano, 1998).
Canonical babbling as a key milestone
In typical development, infants from birth produce vegetative vocalizations (e.g., coughs,
burps, etc.)
and cry, as well as vowel-like sounds that become more elaborate with time,
incorporating supraglottal articulations until canonical syllables emerge, usually by early in
the second half-year of life.
Robust onset of canonical babbling has been well documented
in typically developing infants by not later than 10 months (Koopmans-van Beinum & van
der Stelt, 1986; Oller, 1980; Stark, 1980).
The impression of robustness has been reinforced
by the fact that no delay in onset of canonical babbling has been discerned in infants
anticipated to be at-risk for communication deficits due to premature birth or low
socioeconomic status (Eilers et al., 1993; Oller, Eilers, Basinger, Steffens, & Urbano, 1995).
Even infants with Down syndrome usually show normal ages of onset, although a group
level delay of a month or more is detectable (Lynch et al., 1995).
Furthermore, infants
tracheostomized at birth to provide an artificial airway that prevents or substantially inhibits
vocalization for many months tend to produce age-appropriate canonical syllables within a
short period after decannulation (Bleile, Stark, & McGowan, 1993; Locke & Pearson, 1990;
Ross, 1983; Simon, Fowler, & Handler, 1983).
Only profound hearing impairment and Williams syndrome have been shown to produce
consistent substantial delays in the onset of canonical babbling (Kent, Osberger, Netsell, &
Hustedde, 1987; Koopmans-van Beinum, Clement, & van den Dikkenberg-Pot, 1998;
Masataka, 2001; Oller & Eilers, 1988; Stoel-Gammon & Otomo, 1986).
Further supporting
the idea that restricted hearing prevents experiences critical to onset of canonical babbling,
Patten et al.
Page 2
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
age of onset in severely or profoundly hearing impaired infants has been reported to be
positively correlated with age of amplification (Eilers & Oller, 1994).
In infants without known disorders, onset of canonical babbling after ten months has been
shown to be a significant predictor of language delay or other developmental disabilities
(Oller, Eilers, Neal, & Schwartz, 1999; Stark, Ansel, & Bond, 1988; Stoel-Gammon, 1989).
But late onset of canonical babbling is a rare occurrence in infants without easily diagnosed
physical or mental limitations.
The seeming resistance to derailment of this developmental
milestone suggests that canonical babbling is of such importance in human development that
it has been evolved to emerge within a relatively tightly constrained time period in spite of
substantial variations in home environments and perinatal events.
The importance of
canonical babbling in predicting later language functioning is assumed to be due to the fact
that words are overwhelmingly composed of canonical syllables, and thus lexical learning
depends on control of canonical syllables.
To date, only two studies of which we are aware have targeted canonical babbling in ASD
and neither specifically examined the onset of canonical babbling, But reasons for optimism
that delays in onset of canonical babbling could constitute an early ASD marker can be
found in research showing that various aspects of vocalization appear to be disrupted in
young children with ASD (Paul, Augustyn, Klin, & Volkmar, 2005; Peppe, McCann,
Gibbon, O’Hara, & Rutherford, 2007; Sheinkopf, Mundy, Oller, & Steffens, 2000; Warren,
Gilkerson, Richards, & Oller, 2010; Wetherby et al., 2004).
Research using automated
analysis of all-day recordings based on the automated LENA (Language ENvironment
Analysis) system of classification has shown clear indications that young children with ASD
(16–48 months) display low rates of canonical syllable production compared with typically
developing infants, even after matching of subgroups for expressive language (Oller et al.,
2010).
Even more to the point, one recent study has assessed the usage of canonical syllables
(though not the onset of canonical babbling) in infants at high-risk for ASD because they
were siblings of children with ASD; seven of 24 participants in the study received a
provisional diagnosis of ASD at 24 months (Paul, Fuerst, Ramsay, Chawarska, & Klin,
2011).
As a group, the at-risk infants (all 24) produced significantly lower mean canonical
babbling ratios (canonical syllables divided by all “speech-like” vocalizations, i.e., those
deemed “transcribable” by the researchers) compared to low-risk infants at nine-months of
age, but there were no significant differences at 12 months.
“Non-speech” vocalizations
(those deemed “not transcribable” e.g., yells, squeals, growls) were not included in the
evaluation of canonical babbling.
Other vocal measures—especially number of consonant-
like elements and number of speech-like and proportion of non-speech-like vocalizations—
also appeared to be potentially useful indicators of emergent ASD.
Volubility in ASD
Volubility, or rate of vocalization, measured in terms of frequency of syllable or utterance
production, may be limited in ASD, a possibility that is supported by automated analysis of
data showing low volubility in ASD from all-day recordings on children from 16 to 48
months of age based on the LENA system (Warren et al., 2010).
Volubility in infants with
severe or profound hearing loss and in infants with Down syndrome has not been found to
Patten et al.
Page 3
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
be depressed compared with typically developing infants; however, infants from lower
socio-economic status (SES) have been shown consistently to produce fewer utterances per
minute than their middle or high SES peers (Eilers et al., 1993; Oller et al., 1995).
Research
suggests that children in low SES experience less communication from caregivers (Hart &
Risley, 1995; Snow, 1995).
The lower volubility of these infants may be a product of
decreased social-communication from adults, potentially resulting in lower levels of social
motivation in the infants.
Variability in moment-to-moment parental interactivity clearly does affect infant volubility
by the middle of the first year of life, as indicated by research on parent-infant interaction in
the “still-face” paradigm.
The work suggests a strong tendency in the particular case of
parent still-face for infants to increase vocalization rate.
Specifically, volubility during a
baseline period of one to three minutes of face-to-face vocal interaction is substantially
lower than during a following still-face period of one to three minutes where the parent
withholds any facial or vocal reaction while continuing to look directly at the infant.
This
pattern is seen in infants after 5 months, but not at 3 months, where volubility does not
change at the shift from face-to-face interaction to still-face (Delgado, Messinger, & Yale,
2002; Goldstein, Schwade, & Bornstein, 2009; Yale, Messinger, Cobo-Lewis, Oller, &
Eilers, 1999).
The results from the still-face paradigm are interpreted to mean that infants
seek to re-engage the withdrawn parent during the still-face period, having learned by the
middle of the first year that their vocalizations can have impact (Tronick, 1982).
This effect
raises the question of whether infants with emergent ASD similarly increase their volubility
to re-engage their caregivers after a period of withdrawn caregiver attention, or whether they
decrease volubility, possibly due to diminished motivation to engage socially with others.
Frequency of vocalizations directed at others has been reported to be significantly lower in
infants later diagnosed with ASD compared to typically developing infants at 12 months but
not at 6 months (Ozonoff, Iosif, Baguio, Cook, Hill, et al., 2010).
It is also notable that
frequency of vocalization based on parent report is predictive of language abilities in
toddlers with ASD (Weismer, Lord, & Esler, 2010).
Paul et al.
(2011) assessed frequency of
vocalization in infants at high-risk and low-risk for developing ASD and found no difference
between groups.
However, the study did not actually test for volubility the way volubility is
defined here and in much prior research.
Frequency of vocalization was tallied in a special
way in the Paul et al.
study, by counting all speech-like (phonetically transcribable) and
nonspeech-like (not phonetically transcribable) vocalizations that occurred within the first
50 speech-like vocalizations of each recorded sample.
But not all participants produced 50
speech-like utterances, and in the ones who did, the length of recording required to reach the
50 speech-like utterance criterion was variable.
Thus, rate of vocalizations per unit of time
was not examined in this study; consequently, given the common usage of the term
volubility, it is not possible to determine whether there was a difference in volubility
between the groups.
In addition, participants in this study were at high-risk for ASD—some
were later diagnosed with ASD while some were not.
This mixture may have attenuated
group differences.
It should also be noted that Weismer et al.
included only child
vocalizations directed at others while Paul et al.
included vocalizations.
Although ASD has
roots in social impairments, vocalizations directed at others as well as independent vocal
play might well be abnormal in ASD.
Patten et al.
Page 4
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A new study of early vocal development in ASD
One reason the development of pre-speech vocal behaviors in ASD has not been well
documented may be that ASD is not reliably diagnosed until long after canonical syllables
are expected to emerge, thus making prospective analyses challenging.
Retrospective
interviews with parents whose children have been diagnosed with ASD regarding age at
which canonical syllables emerged may be hindered by poor parent recall, given that parents
are generally asked to remember the nature of child babbling that occurred one or more
years prior to the time of the interview; also, parents’ awareness of the diagnosis may bias
their recall of the onset of canonical babbling.
The effort by Paul et al.
(2011) cited above
represents a key advancement in methodology because they assessed infants known to be at-
risk in a prospective fashion.
Our approach seizes an additional opportunity afforded by the
fortuitous existence of home video data from the first year of life that can be analyzed after
diagnosis of ASD for comparison with similar video data from infants who did not receive
the diagnosis.
As indicated in studies cited above, emergence of canonical syllables is a critical milestone
in the development of spoken language, and delayed onset has been shown to be predictive
of significant communication impairment.
Canonical babbling and volubility have not been
well characterized in infants with ASD.
To arrive at a better understanding of these two
variables as potential indicators of ASD risk in infants, we investigated vocalizations of
infants later diagnosed with ASD and typically developing (TD) infants at two age ranges,
9–12 months and 15–18 months, using retrospective video analysis methods.
Previous
research has suggested that nearly all TD infants reach the canonical babbling stage by 9–12
months (Eilers & Oller, 1994), and on the assumption that a delay might be present in the
children later diagnosed with ASD, we predicted such delay would be observed in this age
range.
We took the opportunity also to evaluate the available data at 15–18 months because
any infant with a failure to show canonical babbling at that age would be greatly delayed in
canonical babbling onset and would be considered at very high risk for a variety of
disorders.
The coding scheme for this study is based on a widely applied method for laboratory-based
evaluation of canonical babbling (Oller, 2000).
In accord with this method, infants are
assumed to be in the canonical stage if they show a canonical babbling ratio (canonical
syllables divided by all syllables) of at least .15, a value based on coding by trained listeners
of a recording.
A value of .15 or greater from such laboratory coding has been empirically
determined in prior research as corresponding to parent judgments that infants are in the
canonical stage (Lewedag, 1995).
It has been reasoned that parent judgments constitute the
most appropriate standard for establishing this criterion value (Oller, 2000).
This reasoning
is based on three points: 1) Parents respond to interview questions by providing very
consistent and accurate information about canonical babbling in their infants (Papoušek,
1994; Oller, Eilers, & Basinger, 2001); 2) this parental capability is predictable, given that
recognizing canonical babbling represents nothing more than being able to recognize
syllables as being well-formed enough that they could form parts of words in real speech
(and of course normal adults can easily recognize vocalizations of humans as speech or non-
speech); and 3) parents appear to intuitively understand that the onset of canonical babbling
Patten et al.
Page 5
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
is an emergent foundation for speech, as evidenced by the fact that they initiate intuitive
lexical teaching as soon as they begin to recognize canonical babbling in their infants
(Papoušek, 1994).
Consistent parent recognition of the onset of canonical babbling runs in
parallel with recognition of other developmental milestones (e.g., sitting unsupported,
crawling, walking).
In our study we could not use parents as informants about the age of
onset of canonical babbling since that onset had occurred a very long time before our first
contact with them.
Consequently, the canonical babbling ratio, determined from recordings
coded in our laboratory, provided the best available measure upon which to base inference
about whether infants had reached the canonical stage.
In the present study the following hypotheses were tested:
1.
Infants later diagnosed with ASD will be less likely than TD infants to be in the
canonical stage at each age (9–12 and 15–18 months), as determined by whether
their canonical babbling ratios exceed the .15 criterion.
2.
Infants later diagnosed with ASD will demonstrate significantly lower canonical
babbling ratios (independent of the canonical stage criterion) compared to TD
infants.
3.
Infants later diagnosed with ASD will demonstrate significantly fewer total
vocalizations (lower volubility) at both age ranges compared to TD infants.
4.
A combined analysis using both volubility and canonical babbling status will
significantly predict group membership.
Method
Participants
A total of 37 participants were included in the present study, 23 individuals later diagnosed
with ASD and 14 individuals in the TD group (Table 1).
There was one set of fraternal twins
in the ASD group.
Participants were drawn from a larger study conducted at the University
of North Carolina-Chapel Hill based on availability of video recordings; participants must
have had two five-minute edited video segments at 9–12 months and at least one edited
video segment at 15–18 months.
As part of the larger study, participants were recruited from
the Midwest and Southeast over a 15-year time period.
Recruitment criteria included: (1)
child age between two and seven years at the time of recruitment; (2) available home
videotapes of the child between birth and two years of age that parents were willing to share;
and (3) enough video footage for at least one 5-minute codable segment (see video editing
section below) of the child at either 9–12 or 15–18 months of age.
All participants included in the ASD group received a clinical diagnosis of ASD from a
licensed psychologist and/or physician at a point after the recordings were made.
Thus, our
design is a retrospective analysis similar to others that have used home movies of children
later diagnosed with ASD (Baranek, 1999; Werner, Dawson, Osterling, & Dinno, 2000).
A
trained research staff member validated diagnoses for each participant using criteria from
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) and
from one or more ASD screening and diagnostic tools, including: the Childhood Autism
Patten et al.
Page 6
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Rating Scale (CARS; Schopler, Reichler, & Renner, 1992), the Autism Diagnostic
Observation Schedule (ADOS; Lord, et al., 1999), and/or the Autism Diagnostic Interview-
Revised (ADI-R; Rutter, LeCouteur, & Lord, 2003).
All participants had CARS scores and
each participant in the ASD group had ADI/ADI-R scores and 13 of the 23 ASD participants
had ADOS scores.
Typically developing group membership was based in part on scores within normal limits
(i.e., not more than one standard deviation below the mean) on the Mullen Scales of Early
Learning (Mullen, 1995) and/or the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (VABS; Sparrow,
Balla, & Cicchetti, 1984).
An additional exclusionary criterion for any participants in the TD
group was any history of learning or developmental difficulties per parent report.
Individuals
with significant physical, visual or hearing impairments or known genetic conditions (e.g.,
Fragile X or Rett’s Syndrome) associated with ASD were excluded.
As indicated in Table 1,
mean age (in months) was very similar across groups, gender was balanced, and the two
groups were also similar with regard to SES based on maternal education.
Our families were
mostly middle SES with access to videotaping equipment.
The University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Institutional Review Board approved the
study, and all families signed informed consents.
For more information regarding
recruitment and inclusion criteria see Baranek (1999).
Video Editing Procedures
Families provided home videos of their child from birth to two years as available.
The
videotapes included footage from a variety of contexts including family play situations,
vacations, outings, special events, and familiar routines (e.g., mealtimes), with individual
variation in situational content of each family’s videotapes as would be expected in home
videotapes.
All videotapes were copied, transformed to digital formats, and originals were
returned to participating families.
Video editing guidelines first focused on the identification of video footage during which the
child was consistently visible and for which the parents felt they could accurately identify
the child’s age.
The two age ranges were originally selected for another study on early
behavior in ASD (Baranek, 1999).
At the same time, the two age ranges are well-suited to
our current purposes.
The 9–12 month age range is the earliest age range in which parents
had sufficient videotape footage for it to be useful in our research and represents the time
period when a number of communicative behaviors emerge.
Further, this is a time frame
during which the vast majority of TD children would be expected to already be in the
canonical babbling stage.
The 15–18 month range provided follow-up on the same children
with the expectation that monitored behaviors would be more consistent and would allow for
confirmation or clarification of data from the earlier age.
In TD children, canonical babbling
is usually well consolidated by the 15–18 month age range (Vihman, 1996; Oller, 2000).
In editing tapes for the larger study, the aim was to compile two 5-minute video segments
for each child in the 9–12 age range, and two 5-minute segments in the 15–18 month age
range.
On average, each 5-minute segment consisted of 5 scenes.
Research assistants who
were blind to the research questions and not informed of the diagnostic status of the
Patten et al.
Page 7
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
participants edited the videotapes and coded each scene for the following content variables:
(a) number of people present; (b) amount of physical restriction on child’s freedom to move,
rated as low, medium, or high; (c) the amount of social intrusion another person was using
to engage the child in interaction, rated as low, medium, or high; (d) and the types of events
(e.g., meal time, bath time, active play, special events) (Baranek, 1999).
The assistants were
instructed to quasi-randomly select a cross-section of scenes from the available footage in
the designated age ranges, purposely including scenes from each one-month age interval for
which video footage was available within each age range, provided that the child was visible
in each selected scene.
All participants included in the current study had two 5-minute
compilations (i.e., 10 minutes total) for the 9–12 month age range, but at the 15–18 month
age range, there were three TD infants and one infant with ASD for whom only a single 5-
minute segment was assembled due to insufficient video footage.
As a result, the mean
duration of samples at the 15–18 month age range was 9.5 minutes rather than 10.
Although vocalization from the infants was common in these scenes, the segments were not
specifically selected to capture vocal behavior.
Therefore, volubility estimated from the
present study may be lower than in prior works where infants have been observed in settings
designed to maximize vocal interaction.
Similarly, the video segment selection procedure
may yield differences in canonical babbling from prior studies.
In most studies, 20–30
minutes of vocal interaction have been recorded, whereas here we had less than half that
amount of data per sample.
Our procedure can be predicted to produce greater variability in
canonical babbling ratios than in studies with longer sampling periods (Molemans, 2011;
Molemans et al., 2011).
Additionally, the audio-video quality of these home movies was not
as good as would be expected in laboratory studies, another factor that could reduce
perceived canonical babbling and volubility.
To ensure that the contexts in which children were recorded were comparable, specific
content parameters were identified and compared (Tables 2 and 3).
No differences were
found between the groups on any content parameter including: number of people present,
level of physical restriction (i.e., amount of physical confinement such as a highchair versus
free play; rated as low, medium or high), amount of social intrusion (rated as low, medium
or high), and the total number of event types (e.g., meal time, active play).
The number of
times each event type (e.g., bath time, playtime) was represented in the ASD group versus
the TD group for each age was compared using chi-square analyses.
Results for the omnibus
chi-square test failed to reach significance in the 9–12 month age group (p > 0.05), but did
reach significance in the 15–18 months age group (p = 0.046).
Typically developing children
were more likely to be engaged in passive activities at the 15–18 month age range (p =
0.046; TD = 16.6%, ASD = 4.6%) according to follow-up analysis of the six event
categories.
See Tables 4 and 5 for the percentage in each category.
For a comprehensive
description of the coding procedures that yielded the data on situational context see Watson,
Crais, Baranek, Dykstra, and Wilson (2012).
Coding Procedure and Observer Agreement
The videotapes analyzed in this study were coded for infant production of all syllables in
speech-like vocalizations by two certified speech-language pathologists who were not
Patten et al.
Page 8
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
informed of the diagnostic group of the infants.
The intent was, of course, for the coders to
be blind to diagnostic category, and with the exception of one infant to be discussed below,
the coders reported they saw no reason to suspect any infant of having ASD.
We defined speech-like vocalizations (as in the primary literature on canonical babbling) to
include both canonical and precanonical infant vocalizations (regardless of whether they
would be deemed “transcribable”).
Training of the two coders was provided by the last
author, who originated the definition of “canonical syllable” used in this study, and who has
conducted and collaborated on numerous studies on onset of canonical babbling, rate of
canonical babbling, and volubility in infants (Cobo-Lewis, Oller, Lynch, & Levine, 1996;
Lynch et al., 1995; Oller & Eilers, 1982, 1988; Oller, Eilers, & Basinger, 2001; Oller et al.,
1995; Oller, Eilers, Neal, & Cobo-Lewis, 1998).
The two observers were trained in
identifying canonical syllables and in counting all syllables independent of their canonical
status.
The video samples used during training were separate (although drawn from similar
materials based on the home recordings) and not included in the analyses for this
investigation.
Syllables were defined as rhythmic units of speech-like vocalization, excluding raspberries,
effort “grunt” sounds (i.e., a schwa-like sounds produced as an artifact of physical exertion),
ingressive sounds, sneezes, hiccups, crying and laughing.
Within an “utterance”, which was
defined as a vocal breath group (Lynch, Oller, Steffens, & Buder, 1995), it was possible to
identify syllables as corresponding to sonority peaks (high points of pitch and/or amplitude)
that are intuitively recognized by mature listeners.
These rhythmic events occur in time
frames typical of syllables in real speech (usually with durations of 200–400 ms).
A
canonical syllable is defined as including a vowel-like nucleus, at least one margin (or
consonant-like sound) and a transition between margin and nucleus that is rapid and
uninterrupted.
In general, transitions that are too fast to be tracked auditorily (too fast to be
heard “as transitions”) are instead heard as gestalt syllables.
Auditory tracking of these
transitions focuses on formant (acoustic energy) transitions that can be measured on
spectrograms as typically < 120 ms (Oller, 2000).
Formants are audible bands of energy
corresponding to resonant frequencies of the vocal tract that change as the tract changes
shape or size.
Audible formant transitions occur, then, when the vocal tract moves during
opening from a consonantal closure into a vowel or vice versa.
Examples of canonical utterances (which must include at least one canonical syllable) are
syllables that a listener might perceive as ba, taka, or gaga.
Vocalizations produced while
mouthing objects (e.g., toys or fingers) or eating were excluded from our analyses on the
grounds that we could not be sure what role movement of the hands may have played in the
apparent syllabification.
Videos were randomized and randomly distributed across the two coders with regard to
diagnostic group.
The 37 participants’ videos were randomly split between the coders by
participant and included both age ranges.
The coders independently watched the videos,
counting both syllables and canonical syllables in real time.
This procedure is utilized
regularly in the laboratories of the last author in accord with reasoning presented in recent
Patten et al.
Page 9
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
papers, especially Ramsdell et al.
(2012).
This naturalistic listening approach mimics how a
mother would hear her child, listening to each utterance only once.
The measure of canonical babbling ratio used here (number of canonical syllables divided
by number of all syllables) is the measure utilized in the bulk of research on onset of
canonical babbling to date.
However, some studies have used a different ratio (number of
canonical syllables divided by number of utterances).
The former procedure is generally
preferred nowadays because the resulting value can be interpreted as a proportion with
values varying from 0 to 1, whereas the latter procedure yields a ratio with no effective
upper limit (Oller, 2000).
In a coder agreement test, both observers independently coded twenty samples consisting of
two five-minute segments of ten participants’ video footage.
A research assistant unaware of
the study goals selected these test samples, and they represented both diagnostic groups and
both ages.
Reliability was gauged in accord with the degree to which coders agreed upon
canonical syllables, total syllables, and whether the child was in the canonical babbling stage
(i.e., had a canonical babbling ratio > 0.15, the standard criterion).
Inter-rater agreement
ranged from good to excellent for canonical syllables (ICC = .98, CI95 = .96 – .99) and for
total syllables (ICC = .87, CI95 = .61 – .95).
Reliability for canonical babbling ratios was
also good (ICC = .89, CI95 = .69 – .96), with agreement on the canonical stage criterion at
95% for the twenty samples.
Additionally, the coders differed by an average of only 10% of
the total range of canonical babbling ratios obtained, and the correlation across the ratios for
the twenty samples for the two coders was .89.
For volubility, the coders differed by an
average of 13% of the total range for volubility values, and the correlation across the twenty
sample videos for the two coders was .91.
Results
Analyses were performed to confirm that the groups were matched on demographic
variables.
These analyses did not reveal significant differences between groups on any
variable (see Table 1).
Initial descriptive statistics for within- and between-group variables revealed two outliers in
the ASD group.
Both cases produced very high canonical babbling ratios in the 9–12 month
range (.93 and .64) relative to the mean for both groups (ASD = .12 for the 23 cases, TD = .
17) (see Figure 1).
Based on prior research, the canonical babbling ratios observed for these
two ASD cases were substantially higher than would be expected in TD infants in the 9–12
month age range—infants grouped as having English or Spanish at home, as high or low
SES, and as born at term or prematurely all showed mean canonical babbling ratios under .4
from 8 to 12 months of age (Oller, Eilers, Urbano, & Cobo-Lewis, 1997; Oller, Eilers,
Steffens, Lynch, & Urbano, 1994).
Analysis of z-scores revealed that infant 22 was 3.96
standard deviations above the mean for the present sample, and infant 23 was 2.73 standard
deviations above the mean, further suggesting outlier status.
On this basis we decided to
eliminate these two cases in the primary analyses on canonical babbling; the remaining 35
cases (21 ASD, 14 TD) were analyzed to address our research questions regarding canonical
babbling (see Figures 1 and 2 for canonical babbling ratios by participant at both ages, with
Patten et al.
Page 10
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the two outliers indicated).
However, there were no significant outliers with regard to
volubility, and thus we included data from all 37 cases for that analysis (see Figures 3 and 4
for syllable volubility by participant at both ages).
Hypothesis 1: Infants later diagnosed with ASD will be less likely than typically developing
infants to be in the canonical stage at each age (9–12 and 15–18 months)
Log odds ratios (log OR) were calculated to compare the classifications of both ASD and
typically developing children with regard to their canonical babbling.
The criterion for
canonical babbling stage was set at 15% or greater canonical syllables compared to all
syllables; this is a common criterion in studies of canonical babbling, and is based on data
reviewed in Oller (2000).
TD infants were significantly more likely to have reached the
canonical babbling stage based on the criterion than were infants later diagnosed with ASD
at the 9–12 months age range (N = 35, log OR = 2.84, CI95 = 1.02 to 4.66, p = 0.002), and
remained more likely at the 15–18 month age range (N = 35, log OR = 1.78, CI95 = −0.04 to
3.61, p = 0.054).
As an easily interpretable effect size measure, the simple odds ratios (as
opposed to the log odds ratio, which is statistically preferable for significance testing with
small N’s) can be considered; the simple ORs indicated TD infants were 17 times more
likely (OR = 17.1) to be categorized as in the canonical stage than ASD infants at 9–12
months and 6 times more likely (OR = 5.96) at 15–18 months.
Hypothesis 2: Infants later diagnosed with ASD will demonstrate significantly lower
canonical babbling ratios (independent of the canonical stage criterion) compared to
typically developing infants
Canonical babbling ratios of infants later diagnosed with ASD and TD infants were
contrasted using a Mixed ANOVA.
The between-subjects variable was diagnostic category
(ASD vs. TD) and the within-subjects variable was age range (9–12 months and 15–18
months).
The mean canonical babbling ratios at 9–12 months were .06 (SD = .06) for the 21
infants later diagnosed with ASD and .17 (SD = .13) for the 14 TD infants; at 15–18 months
the values were .16 (SD = .22) and .28 (SD = .16) respectively (Figure 5).
Analyses revealed
a significant main effect for diagnostic category (F (1,1) = 6.79, p = .01, ŋp2 = 0.17), with
infants later diagnosed with ASD producing significantly lower canonical babbling ratios,
and a significant main effect for age (F (1,1) = 7.86, p < .01, ŋp2 = 0.19), with higher
canonical babbling ratios at the older age.
The effect size between groups for 9–12 months
was d = 1.09 (a large effect) and for 15–18 months was .62 (a moderate effect; Cohen,
1992).
The age by diagnosis interaction was not significant (p > 0.66).
Hypothesis 3: Infants later diagnosed with ASD will demonstrate significantly fewer total
vocalizations (lower volubility) at both age ranges compared to typically developing
infants
For this analysis, all 37 infants were included because there were no significant outliers.
Volubility of infants later diagnosed with ASD and TD infants were contrasted using a
Mixed ANOVA.
The between-subjects variable was diagnostic category (ASD vs. TD), and
the within-subjects variable was age range (9–12 months and 15–18 months).
Infants later
diagnosed with ASD produced a mean of 4.55 (SD = .59) syllables per minute while TD
Patten et al.
Page 11
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
infants produced a mean of 5.86 (SD = .67) syllables per minute at 9–12 months.
At 15–18
months, infants later diagnosed with ASD produced a mean of 3.24 (SD = .49) syllables per
minute while TD infants produced a mean of 4.63 (SD = .51) syllables per minute (see
Figure 6).
Analyses revealed a significant main effect for diagnostic category (F (1,1) =
4.85, p = .034, ŋp2 = 0.12), and for age (F (1,1) = 4.96, p = .032, ŋp2 = 0.12).
Thus, infants
later diagnosed with ASD displayed significantly lower volubility than TD infants.
The
effect size for group at 9–12 months was d = 2.07 (large) and at 15–18 months was 2.77
(large).
Hypothesis 4: A combined analysis using both volubility and canonical babbling status
will significantly predict group membership
Logistic regression analysis was conducted to test whether canonical babbling status
(whether each participant met the .15 criterion) and volubility at age ranges of 9–12 months
and 15–18 months could reliably predict later diagnosis status (group membership).
This test
was conducted with all 37 cases included, partly in order to match the number of cases for
the two predictor variables and partly because the goal of the analysis was to determine the
potential practical utility of identification of these children without any information other
than volubility and canonical babbling ratio.
This test may thus be the one of primary
clinical interest, since it evaluates the circumstance that screening implies, where there
would be no basis for knowing whether an infant might be an outlier on any variable.
Without this evaluation there would be no direct indication in our results of the degree of
group discriminability.
Statistical significance was reached in a test of the full model against a constant-only model,
which indicated that, as a set, canonical babbling status and volubility reliably predicted
later diagnosis (χ2 = 9.82, p = 0.044, df = 4).
A small-to-moderate relationship between
prediction and grouping was observed (Nagelkerke’s R2 = 0.317), with an overall prediction
success of 75% (64% for TD and 82% for ASD).
However, further examination of the
predictors using the Wald criterion revealed that when all four predictor variables were
included in the model, none significantly contributed to prediction of group membership at
an individual level (p > 0.05).
The status of infants with regard to canonical babbling stage
at the 9–12 months age range provided the largest observed predictive contribution, Wald =
3.06, p = 0.08, EXP(B) = 0.198.
The contribution to group discriminability by volubility at
9–12 and 15–18 months age ranges approached nil, EXP(B) = 0.992 and 0.985 respectively.
Examination of the correlations among the predictor variables showed that all but volubility
at 9–12 months were significantly correlated with all other predictors (Table 6), with
volubility at 9–12 months significantly correlated with only canonical babbling at 9–12
months.
This inter-relation among the predictor variables suggests that, to some degree, they
account for some of the same variance in diagnosis.
However, the observed EXP(B) values
(odds ratios of the outcomes given the value of an individual predictor) more strongly
suggest that canonical babbling at 9–12 months accounted for the bulk of the variability in
diagnosis.
It seems clear that significance of the individual predictors in the logistic regression may
have been hampered by the high level of relation among them.
Individually, the volubility
Patten et al.
Page 12
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
variables did not appear to have much influence given small Betas and high p-values.
When
predictors were entered into the model in a hierarchical fashion, no matter how predictor
entry was ordered (9–12 month variables at step 1 and 15–18 month variables at step 2, or
CB variables at step 1 and volubility at step 2), only the 9–12 month CB variable was a
significant independent predictor.
R2 changes and diagnostic ability for all of the regression
and regression step iterations suggested little was added to the R2 by adding variables in the
second step (even with two more predictor variables, only ~ 2–3% was added to R2), nor did
these additions substantially alter the ability of the model to predict later diagnosis.
The
most efficient model appeared to be a logistic regression with 9–12 month CB as the only
predictor.
Discussion
The importance of early intervention for children with ASD has resulted in attempts to
quantify behaviors in infancy that may lead to early detection.
Substantial effort has
addressed gestural and social development and their potential roles in detection within the
first year of life (e.g., Watson, Crais, Baranek, Dykstra, & Wilson, 2013).
The present
results offer parallel findings in the domain of vocal development by demonstrating
significant group differences in canonical babbling status, canonical babbling ratio, and total
syllables produced (volubility) during the first year of life.
In our study, infants later diagnosed with ASD were significantly less likely to be classified
as being in the canonical babbling stage, and demonstrated significantly reduced canonical
babbling ratios compared to TD peers.
Although significant group differences were apparent
in both age ranges (9–12 and 15–18 months), the effect sizes for canonical babbling were
larger at 9–12 months.
Paul et al.
(2011) demonstrated similar results in infants at high-risk
for developing ASD who produced significantly lower canonical babbling ratios compared
to low risk infants at 9 months, though at 12 months the differences were not statistically
significant.
Combined with the finding from Oller et al.
(2010) that children with ASD up to
48 months of age show low canonical syllable production, the data here suggest that low
production of canonical syllables may be a helpful marker for ASD from infancy into early
childhood.
Since canonical babbling is well established in the vast majority of TD infants by 10 months
(Eilers and Oller, 1994), it might seem odd that several of the TD infants (5 at 9–12 months
and 3 at 15–18 months) in the present study provided samples that did not meet the .15
canonical babbling ratio criterion for assignment to the canonical stage of vocal
development.
However, it is important to consider the fact that even infants who are clearly
in the canonical stage based on parent report often fail to reach the criterion in a single
laboratory sample of 20–30 minutes (Lewedag, 1995).
In addition, unlike the samples in
prior research on canonical babbling, the samples here were not designed to elicit
vocalizations, and consequently they may have been less rich in quantity and variety of
vocalization than the samples that were used to develop the criterion.
Further, our samples at
9–12 months were only 10 minutes in duration, and at 15–18 months an average of slightly
less than 10 minutes; it has been shown that variability in obtained canonical babbling ratios
increases as the length of samples decreases (Molemans, 2011; Molemans, Van den Berg,
Patten et al.
Page 13
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Van Severen, & Gillis, 2011).
Finally, our samples were based on home recordings with
considerable noise and variable camera management that may have impeded our ability to
recognize vocalizations in the samples.
Consequently, we are not surprised that some of the
TD infants failed to reach the criterion used to determine canonical status based on
laboratory samples.
Given the strong links between the onset of canonical babbling and language development
(Oller, Eilers, Urbano, & Cobo-Lewis, 1997; Stoel-Gammon, 1989), delayed onset of
canonical babbling in infants with ASD may reflect latent communication impairment.
It
also may be that delayed canonical babbling directly contributes to communication
symptoms in ASD.
Canonical babbling requires motor ability as well as motivation to
produce syllables, and practice in babbling may lay critical foundations for speech.
Prospective research on motor development in infants later diagnosed with ASD is sparse
and often limited to high-risk groups, but available research does indicate that early motor
impairment may be present (e.g., Matson, Mahan, Fodstad, Hess, & Neal, 2010; Manjiviona
& Prior 1995; Page & Boucher, 1998; Teitelbaum, Teitelbaurm, Nye, Fryman, & Maurer,
1998).
Thus delayed canonical babbling may reflect an immature or disordered motor
system with specific implications for speech.
If language develops as a consequence of social reinforcement of speech-like sounds that
eventually evolve into true words (consider behavioral models of language development as
in Hulit & Howard, 2002; Goldstein, King, & West, 2003; Goldstein & Schwade, 2008;
Goldstein & West, 1999), then social reinforcement may encourage the production of
canonical babbling.
Children with ASD may be less motivated by social reinforcement,
yielding less frequent vocal exploration and production of canonical syllables than in TD
infants.
To add to the problem, a delay in canonical babbling may result in reduction in
caregiver social-communication directed toward the infant.
On average, by six to seven
months and very rarely later than ten months, canonical babbling emerges in TD infants
(Eilers & Oller, 1994).
In response to recognition of canonical babbling, caregivers alter
their communication pattern, sometimes attempting to direct the infant toward using
canonical syllables meaningfully—for example, the parent who hears  may reply,
“Yes, that’s a bubble” (Papoušek, 1994; Stoel-Gammon, 2011).
Therefore, infants who are
delayed in canonical babbling may also be delayed in their exposure to important linguistic
input, and thus may be given less opportunity to learn words.
A final point is that infants
with ASD may simply have lower motivation to vocalize socially in the first place.
This
lower motivation could provide a further basis for slow vocabulary learning.
Our results on volubility included two statistically reliable findings.
First, children in both
groups had lower volubility at the second age than at the first.
We attribute no particular
theoretical importance to this finding but we take note of the fact that the lower level of
volubility at 15–18 months compared to 9–12 months did correspond to greater physical
movement of the children at the older age.
In both groups combined, level of physical
restriction during the selected recording samples was significantly less at the older age (p < .
001).
As reported earlier, level of physical restriction was not significantly different between
diagnostic groups.
Patten et al.
Page 14
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The second volubility finding is that infants later diagnosed with ASD produced
significantly fewer vocalizations deemed to be relevant for the emergence of speech (both
canonical and non-canonical sounds) at both age ranges (9–12 and 15–18 months) compared
to TD peers.
Other research has demonstrated that infants with ASD direct fewer
vocalizations to others (Ozonoff et al., 2010); our study extends this finding to a more
general measure of volubility in terms of total vocalizations (syllables) rather than only ones
directed to others.
Our finding is also congruent with results from automated analysis of all-
day recordings indicating low volubility in children with ASD at 16–48 months of age
(Warren et al.
2010).
The results may seem to run counter to Paul et al.
(2011) whose
sample of high-risk infants were reported to not produce significantly fewer vocalizations
than low-risk infants.
However, as described in the introduction above, the Paul et al.
study
did not report data in a way that can be directly compared with the volubility data reported
here.
Some disability groups (e.g., hearing impaired infants and infants with cleft palate) have
been reported to exhibit volubility similar to that of TD infants (Clement, 2004; Chapman,
Hardin-Jones, Schulte, & Halter, 2001; Van den Dikkenberg-Pot, Koopmans-van Beinum, &
Clement, 1998; Nathani, Oller, & Neal, 2007; Davis, Morrison, von Hapsburg, & Warner-
Czyz, 2005); however, infants from low SES households have been reported to have
significantly decreased volubility in comparison to those from higher SES households
(Oller, Eilers, Basinger, Steffens, & Urbano, 1995).
Children from low SES backgrounds are
often presumed to be at-risk for language deficits.
Although it would be impossible to
identify and quantify all of the mechanisms through which poverty may affect language
development, research has demonstrated that the amount of communication caregivers direct
toward their children is decreased in low SES situations (Hart & Risley, 1995).
This
impoverished linguistic environment may result in decreased dyadic social and
communicative interactions and thus in a decrease in overall volubility of infants.
It is important to note that the relatively well-matched SES between our two groups suggests
that the differences in volubility were not attributable to differences in SES.
In the case of
low SES households, an impoverished linguistic environment due to lack of parent
responsiveness might be expected to lead to decreased volubility of the infant and later
language difficulty.
For infants later diagnosed with ASD, reduced volubility may be
affected by multiple factors, not related to inherent parental responsiveness, but related
instead to the social impairments of ASD.
One issue is that these children may experience
less linguistic stimulation due to having disrupted sensory processing systems corresponding
to sensory hyporesponsiveness; children with ASD are less likely to respond, or require
substantially more stimulation to respond to environmental events (Baranek, 1999; Baranek
et al., 2013); Miller, Reisman, McIntosh, & Simon, 2001; Rogers & Ozonoff, 2005).
This
characteristic of ASD is also reflected in the tendency for infants as young as eight months
who will later be diagnosed with ASD to be less likely than TD infants to respond to their
name being called (Werner, Dawson, Osterling, & Dinno, 2000).
This lack of
responsiveness may indicate that infants with ASD are less affected by vocal
communication from caregivers than TD infants.
If so, the lack of responsiveness may
reflect an effectively impoverished linguistic environment because of attenuated reception of
caregiver input by infants with ASD and subsequent communication impairments.
Indeed,
Patten et al.
Page 15
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
sensory hyporesponsiveness has been shown to be associated with poorer language
functioning in children with ASD (Watson et al., 2011).
An additional way that the environment for children with ASD may be impoverished could
involve a social feedback loop (Warlaumont et al., 2010) that is under investigation using
automated analysis of vocalizations of parents and infants from all-day home recordings.
Since infants with ASD produce fewer canonical syllables than TD infants, and since
parents respond strongly with language stimulation to canonical syllables, an infant with
ASD may actually hear less language from parents, because parents provide input that is tied
to the infant’s output.
The infant’s low volubility may then be aggravated by lower input
levels resulting from the infant’s own anomalous pattern of vocalization.
Finally, the logistic regression analysis with four independent variables (age 1 and age 2
canonical babbling classification and age 1 and age 2 volubility) demonstrated that
classification of diagnostic category (ASD vs. TD) could be predicted with 75% accuracy,
even when the two outliers were included.
The model more accurately classified infants later
diagnosed with ASD (Sensitivity = 82.6%) than TD infants (Specificity = 64.3%).
The
strongest predictor of group membership was canonical babbling classification at 9–12
months as it alone correctly classified 90% of infants later diagnosed with ASD and 63% of
TD infants.
Thus, in the search for markers of ASD risk in infancy, canonical babbling
status at 9–12 months appears to be the single best candidate among the variables considered
in the current study.
The utility of the measure as a group marker is age dependent, since a
larger proportion of infants in the ASD group at 15–18 months had reached the canonical
stage than at 9–12 months.
To help better understand the high canonical babbling ratios of the two outliers, the coders,
both certified speech-language pathologists, viewed the videos from those infants again after
their outlier status was identified.
We speculated that the outlier status of these two infants
may be related to the phenomenon of motor stereotypy that is common in ASD, that is, that
the two infants were engaged, at least in the 9–12 month samples, in a motor stereotypy
focused precisely on canonical babbling.
In re-examining the videos of the two outliers, the
coders looked for qualitative evidence that might speak to the credibility of this speculation.
In the second viewing of the recordings, the coders noticed that the first outlier infant
produced the majority of the canonical syllables during a single scene while walking
outside.
He repeatedly produced a  syllable during this brief episode, but did not direct
his vocalizations to the caregiver.
The sense that a prelinguistic vocal stereotypy may have
been operating was enhanced by the fact that the same syllable was repeated throughout.
The stereotypy of canonical babbling in this infant was reported by the coders as
constituting the only evidence either had noticed as specifically suggesting the possibility of
ASD while they were coding, and thus, this was the single case where the intended blinding
of the coders to diagnostic group seems to have been foiled.
The coders did not observe any
other stereotypic behaviors vocal or otherwise in these samples.
The second infant engaged
in high canonical babble production while roughhousing with his father, but to our clinical
eyes, that behavior did not seem particularly unusual.
Further research on the possibility that
babbling can be a focus of motor stereotypy in ASD seems in order.
It may be worthy of
Patten et al.
Page 16
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
note that the two outliers’ CARS scores (25 and 31) fell within the range of the scores for
the ASD group (23–50).
In addition to the findings suggesting possible clinically useful markers for ASD, the present
results provide a new scientific view on the robustness of canonical babbling.
There has
been no prior empirical indication that canonical babbling onset is delayed in ASD, nor that
volubility is low in infants later diagnosed with ASD.
Our results thus suggest that the
development of vocalization in infancy is affected by whatever the fundamental disorders of
ASD may be.
Assuming ASD to be a social disorder, it is not obvious that babbling would
necessarily be disturbed in the disorder because the extent to which babbling is a social (as
opposed to an endogenously generated) phenomenon is itself an empirical question.
Our
results can then be thought to provide a new empirical perspective on the possible social
nature of babbling.
The results also suggest that the vocal differentiation of the two groups is
robust, given the relative clarity of the results indicating low canonical babbling and
volubility in the infants in the ASD group, even though we had samples of low recording
quality and very limited duration.
The results seem especially significant in the context of a
broad body of research cited above on the robustness of canonical babbling as a foundation
for language and on the robust resistance of canonical babbling to delay as seen in prior
studies cited in our paper—no delay has been found in cases of prematurity, low SES, or
multilingual exposure.
Future Directions and Limitations
This study provides a proof of concept regarding the notion of atypical emergence of the
canonical babbling stage in the developing infant who will later be diagnosed with ASD and
the possibility that tracking canonical babbling in infancy may add to our repertoire of
markers for ASD prior to one year of age.
Future research to address some of the limitations
of the current study and advance our understanding of the development of canonical
babbling among infants with ASD is warranted by the findings of the current study.
One
limitation in the current study was the lack of a comparison group of infants with later
diagnoses of non-ASD disabilities, which prevents us from definitively attributing the
differences found in this study to ASD rather than general impairments in cognition or
communication.
Our working hypothesis to test in future studies will be that these
differences in canonical babbling onset and in volubility are specific to ASD.
Another limitation was that our study used only short video segments from each time point,
which surely impacted our ability to precisely assess important aspects of vocalization,
because it has been shown that variability in obtained canonical babbling ratios increases as
the length of samples decreases (Molemans, 2011; Molemans, Van den Berg, Van Severen,
& Gillis, 2011).
The low canonical babbling ratios obtained for a few of the TD infants
presumably would not have occurred with larger sample sizes.
In future studies we hope to
obtain longer samples, and if possible to more precisely identify canonical babbling onset
through longitudinal laboratory assessments paired with caregiver report of onset.
But of
course to make this possible, prospective studies may be necessary, with several years of
follow-up, presumably taking advantage of the opportunity presented by sibling studies.
Such studies would also afford the opportunity to obtain much better recordings than are
Patten et al.
Page 17
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
available in retrospective studies such as the present one.
Indeed, sibling studies can now
capitalize on all-day recording, yielding the opportunity to assess vocal development in ASD
with much greater ecological validity and representativeness.
Onset of canonical babbling usually occurs between 5 and 9 months in TD infants.
It
appears from the present data that onset may occur within a much wider range in ASD.
Quantification of onset in ASD may yield prognostic value regarding core communication
symptoms.
For example, if canonical stage onset is delayed beyond a certain threshold, the
infant may be at especially high-risk for remaining nonverbal.
Discovery of such a delay
could allow specific interventions to be tailored based on prognosis earlier in development.
Future research should also focus on caregivers and their roles in canonical stage
development and its identification.
Prior work suggests that with TD infants, parents are
extremely accurate in their reports of the onset of canonical babbling (Oller et al., 2001).
If
caregivers of infants with ASD are similarly capable of identifying onset of canonical
babbling, it may be possible to use canonical babbling onset as part of a parent-report
screening tool for early identification.
In addition, alterations in communication directed to
infants by caregivers as canonical babbling emerges may help to elicit and maintain social-
communicative interaction, and subsequently impact language development.
Our findings on volubility represent another potential avenue for understanding early social-
communication development processes in ASD.
Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of this
possibility is suggested by the proposal that there may be a feedback loop involving low
canonical syllable production in ASD followed by low parental rate of vocalization to
infants, aggravating the low volubility and low rate of canonical syllables in ASD
(Warlaumont et al., 2010).
We anticipate rapid growth of studies tracking this possibility,
especially since there is a rapidly growing possibility of conducting some aspects of such
analysis based on automated classification of vocalizations in all-day recordings as indicated
by the growth of LENA system studies.
Clinical Implications
Our findings suggest that canonical babbling should be considered an important milestone in
infancy that may be delayed in infants who are later diagnosed with ASD.
If infants
demonstrate delays in canonical babbling, a developmental assessment that includes
evaluation of early warning signs for ASD should be administered.
Although volubility
appears less promising as a marker for ASD, it may be useful in combination with other
items in the context of early identification screening tools.
For infants demonstrating either
low canonical babbling ratios or low volubility, interventions to draw infants’ attention to
social-communicative stimuli in that context of dyadic interactions may help stimulate
growth of vocal communication.
Acknowledgments
This research was made possible through a grant from the National Institute for Child Health and Human
Development (R01-HD42168) and a grant from Cure Autism Now Foundation (Sensory-Motor and Social-
Communicative Symptoms of Autism in Infancy).
We thank the families whose participation made this study
possible and the staff who collected and processed data for this project.
Patten et al.
Page 18
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
References
Acevedo MC.
The role of acculturation in explaining ethnic differences in the prenatal health-risk
behaviors, mental health, and parenting beliefs of Mexican American and European American at-
risk women.
Child Abuse & Neglect.
2000; 24:111–127.
[PubMed: 10660014]
American Psychiatric Association.
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.
4.
Washington, DC: Author; 2000. text rev
Baranek GT.
Autism during infancy: A retrospective video analysis of sensory-motor and social
behaviors at 9–12 months of age.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders.
1999; 29:213–
224.
[PubMed: 10425584]
Baranek GT, David FJ, Poe MD, Stone WL, Watson LR.
Sensory Experiences Questionnaire:
Discriminating sensory features in young children with autism, developmental delays, and typical
development.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry.
2006; 47(6):591–601.
[PubMed:
16712636]
Baranek GT, Watson LR, Boyd BA, Poe MD, David FJ, McGuire L. Hyporesponsiveness to social and
nonsocial sensory stimuli in children with autism, children with developmental delays, and typically
developing children.
Development and Psychopathology.
2013; 25(2013):307–320.
[PubMed:
23627946]
Bleile KM, Stark RE, McGowan JS.
Speech development in a child after decannulation: Further
evidence that babbling facilitates later speech development.
Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics.
1993; 7:319–337.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders –Autism and
developmental disabilities monitoring network, 14 Sites, United States, 2008.
Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report Surveillance Summaries.
2012; 61:1–19.
Retrieved from http://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6103a1.htm.
Clarke E, Reichard U, Zuberbühler K. The anti-predator behaviour of wild white-handed gibbons
(Hylobates lar).
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology.
2012; 66:85–96.10.1007/
s00265-011-1256-5
Chapman K, Hardin-Jones M, Schulte J, Halter K. Vocal development of 9 month-old babies with cleft
palate.
Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research.
2001; (44):1268–1283.
Chawarska K, Klin A, Paul R, Macari Volkmar F. A prospective study of toddlers with ASD: Short-
term diagnostic and cognitive outcomes.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders.
2009;
50(10):1235–1245.
Clement, CJ.
PhD Dissertation.
Netherlands Graduate School of Linguistics; Amsterdam: 2004.
Development of vocalizations in deaf and normally hearing infants.
Cobo-Lewis AB, Oller DK, Lynch MP, Levine SL.
Relations of motor and vocal milestones in
typically developing infants and infants with Down syndrome.
American Journal on Mental
Retardation.
1996; 100:456–467.
[PubMed: 8852298]
Cohen, J.
Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences.
Hillsdale,, NJ: Erlbaum Associates;
1988.
Davis BL, Morrison HM, von Hapsburg D, Warner AD.
Early vocal patterns in infants with varied
hearing levels.
Volta Review.
2005; 105(1):7–27.
Delgado CEF, Messinger DS, Yale ME.
Infant responses to direction of parental gaze: A comparison
of two still-face conditions.
Infant Behavior and Development.
2002; 25(3):311–318.
Eilers RE, Oller DK, Levine S, Basinger D, Lynch MP, Urbano R. The role of prematurity and
socioeconomic status in the onset of canonical babbling in infants.
Infant Behavior and
Development.
1993; 16:297–315.
Eilers RE, Oller DK.
Infant vocalizations and the early diagnosis of severe hearing impairment.
The
Journal of Pediatrics.
1994; 124(2):199–203.
[PubMed: 8301422]
Goldstein MH, Schwade JA, Bornstein MH.
The value of vocalizing: Five-month-old infants associate
their own noncry vocalizations with responses from adults.
Child Development.
2009; 80:636–
644.
[PubMed: 19489893]
Patten et al.
Page 19
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Goldstein MH, King AP, West MJ.
Social interaction shapes babbling: Testing parallels between
birdsong and speech.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
2003; 100(13):8030–
8035.
Goldstein MH, Schwade JA.
Social feedback to infants’ babbling facilitates rapid phonological
learning.
Psychological Science.
2008; 19:515–522.
[PubMed: 18466414]
Goldstein MH, West MJ.
Consistent responses of human mothers to prelinguistic infants: The effect of
prelinguistic repertoire size.
Journal of Comparative Psychology.
1999; 113(1):52–58.
[PubMed:
10098268]
Hart, B.; Risley, TR.
Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young American children.
Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes; 1995.
Hulit, LM.
; Howard, MR. Born to talk: An introduction to speech and language development.
Boston:
Allyn and Bacon; 2002.
Kent R, Osberger MJ, Netsell R, Hustedde CG.
Phonetic development identical twins differing in
auditory function.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders.
1987; 52:64–75.
[PubMed: 3807347]
Koopmans-van Beinum, FJ.
; Clement, CJ.
; van den Dikkenberg-Pot, I.
Influence of lack of auditory
speech perception on sound productions of deaf infants.
Berne, Switzerland: International Society
for the Study of Behavioral Development; 1998.
Koopmans-van Beinum, FJ.
; van der Stelt, JM.
Early stages in the development of speech movements.
In: Lindblom, B.; Zetterstrom, R., editors.
Precursors of early speech.
New York: Stockton Press;
1986. p. 37-50.
Lewedag, VL.
Doctoral Dissertation.
University of Miami; Coral Gables, FL: 1995.
Patterns of onset
of canonical babbling among typically developing infants.
Locke JL, Pearson D. Linguistic significance of babbling: Evidence from a tracheostomized infant.
Journal of Child Language.
1990; 17:1–16.
[PubMed: 2312634]
Lord C. Follow-up of two-year-olds referred for possible autism.
Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines.
1995; 36(8):1365–1382.
Lord, C.; Rutter, M.; DiLavore, P.; Risi, S. Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS).
Los
Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services; 1999.
Lynch MP, Oller DK, Steffens ML, Levine SL, Basinger D, Umbel V. The onset of speech-like
vocalizations in infants with Down syndrome.
American Journal of Mental Retardation.
1995;
100(1):68–86.
[PubMed: 7546639]
Lynch MP, Oller DK, Steffens ML, Buder EH.
Phrasing in prelinguistic vocalizations.
Developmental
Psychobiology.
1995; 28:3–23.
[PubMed: 7895922]
Manjiviona J, Prior M. Comparison of Asperger syndrome and high-functioning autistic children on a
test of motor impairment.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders.
1995; 25:23–29.
[PubMed: 7608032]
Masataka N. Why early linguistic milestones are delayed in children with Williams syndrome: Late
onset of hand banging as a possible rate-limiting constraint on the emergence of canonical
babbling.
Developmental Science.
2001; 4:158–164.
Matson JL, Fodstad JC, Dempsey T. What symptoms predict the diagnosis of autism or PDD-NOS in
infants and toddlers with developmental delays using the Baby and Infant Screen for Autism
Traits.
Developmental Neurorehabilitation.
2009; 12(6):381–388.
[PubMed: 20205546]
Matson JL, Mahan S, Hess JA, Fodstad JC, Neal D. Convergent validity of the Autism Spectrum
Disorder-Diagnostic for Children (ASD-DC) and Childhood Autism Rating Scales (CARS).
Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders.
2010; 4(4):633–638.
Miller, LJ.
; Reisman, JE.
; McIntosh, DN.
; Simon, J.
An ecological model of sensory modulation:
Performance in children with fragile X syndrome, autistic disorder, attention–deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, and sensory modulation dysfunction.
In: Smith-Roley, S.; Blanche, EI.
; Schaaf, RC.,
editors.
Understanding the Nature of Sensory Integration with Diverse Populations.
San Antonio,
TX: Therapy Skill Builders; 2001. p. 57-88.
Molemans, I. PhD.
University of Antwerp; Antwerp, Belgium: 2011.
Sounds like babbling: A
Longitudinal investigation of aspects of the prelexical speech repertoire in young children
acquiriing Dutch: Normally hearing children and hearing impaired children with a cochlear
implant.
Patten et al.
Page 20
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Molemans I, Van den Berg R, Van Severen L, Gillis S. How to measure the onset of babbling reliably.
Journal of Child Language.
2011; 39:1–30.
[PubMed: 21418730]
Mullen, EM.
Mullen Scales of Early Learning: AGS Edition.
Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance
Service; 1995.
Nathani S, Oller DK, Neal AR.
On the robustness of vocal development: An examination of infants
with moderate-to-severe hearing loss and additional risk factors.
Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research.
2007; 50(6):1425–1444.
Obenchain P, Menn L, Yoshinaga-Itano C. Can speech development at 36 months in children with
hearing loss be predicted from information available in the second year of life?
Volta Review.
1998; 100:149–180.
Oller, DK.
The emergence of the sounds of speech in infancy.
In: Yeni-Komshian, G.; Kavanagh, J.;
Ferguson, C., editors.
Child phonology, Vol 1: Production.
New York: Academic Press; 1980. p.
93-112.
Oller, DK.
The Emergence of the Speech Capacity.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates;
2000.
Oller DK, Eilers RE.
Similarities of babbling in Spanish- and English-learning babies.
Journal of Child
Language.
1982; 9:565–578.
[PubMed: 7174757]
Oller DK, Eilers RE.
The role of audition in infant babbling.
Child Development.
1988; 59:441–449.
[PubMed: 3359864]
Oller DK, Eilers RE, Steffens ML, Lynch MP, Urbano R. Speech-like vocalizations in infancy: an
evaluation of potential risk factors.
Journal of Child Language.
1994; 21:33–58.
[PubMed:
8006094]
Oller DK, Eilers RE, Urbano R, Cobo-Lewis AB.
Development of precursors to speech in infants
exposed to two languages.
Journal of Child Language.
1997; 27:407–425.
[PubMed: 9308425]
Oller DK, Eilers RE, Basinger D. Intuitive identification of infant vocal sounds by parents.
Developmental Science.
2001; 4:49–60.
Oller DK, Eilers RE, Basinger D, Steffens ML, Urbano R. Extreme poverty and the development of
precursors to the speech capacity.
First Lang.
1995; 15:167–188.
Oller DK, Eilers RE, Neal AR, Cobo-Lewis AB.
Late onset canonical babbling: a possible early
marker of abnormal development.
American Journal on Mental Retardation.
1998; 103:249–265.
[PubMed: 9833656]
Oller DK, Eilers RE, Neal AR, Schwartz HK.
Precursors to speech in infancy: the prediction of speech
and language disorders.
Journal of Communication Disorders.
1999; 32:223–246.
[PubMed:
10466095]
Oller DK, Niyogi P, Gray S, Richards JA, Gilkerson J, Xu D, Warren SF.
Automated Vocal Analysis
of Naturalistic Recordings from Children with Autism, Language Delay and Typical
Development.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
2010; 107:13354–13359.
Osterling JA, Dawson G, Munson JA.
Early recognition of 1-year-old infants with autism spectrum
disorder versus mental retardation.
Development and Psychopathology.
2002; 14(2):239–251.
[PubMed: 12030690]
Ozonoff S, Iosif A, Baguio F, Cook IC, Hill MM, Hutman T, Rogers SJ, Rozga A, Sangha S, Sigman
M, Steinfeld MB, Young GS.
A prospective study of the emergence of early behavioral signs of
autism.
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry.
2010; 49(3):256–
266.
[PubMed: 20410715]
Page J, Boucher J.
Motor impairments in children with autistic disorder.
Child Language Teaching and
Therapy.
1998; 14(3):233.
Papoušek, M. Vom ersten Schrei zum ersten Wort: Anfänge der Sprachentwickelung in der
vorsprachlichen Kommunikation.
Bern: Verlag Hans Huber; 1994.
Paul R, Augustyn A, Klin A, Volkmar FR.
Perception and production of prosody by speakers with
ASD spectrum disorders.
Journal of Autsim and Developmental Disorders.
2005; 35:205–220.
Paul R, Fuerst Y, Ramsay G, Chawarska K, Klin A.
Out of the mouths of babes: Vocal production in
infant siblings of children with ASD.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry.
2011; 52(5):
588–598.
[PubMed: 21039489]
Patten et al.
Page 21
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Peppe S, McCann J, Gibbon F, O’Hara A, Rutherford M. Receptive and expressive prosodic ability in
children with high-functioning ASD.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research.
2007;
50:1015–1028.
Ramsdell HL, Oller DK, Buder EH, Ethington CA, Chorna L. Identification of prelinguistic
phonological categories.
Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research.
2012; 55:1626–1629.
Robins DI, Fein D, Barton MI, Green JA.
The modified checklist for autism in toddlers: An initial
study investigating the early detection of autism and pervasive developmental disorders.
Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders.
2001; 31:131–144.
[PubMed: 11450812]
Rogers SJ, Ozonoff S. Annotation: What do we know about sensory dyfunction in autism?
A critical
review of the empirical evidence.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry.
2005; 46(12):1255–
1268.
[PubMed: 16313426]
Ross GS.
Language functioning and speech development of six children receiving tracheostomy in
infancy.
Journal of Communication Disorders.
1983; 15:95–111.
[PubMed: 7096617]
Rutter, M.; Le Couteur, A.; Lord, C. Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised.
Los Angeles, CA: Western
Psychological Services; 2003.
Schopler, E.; Reichler, RJ.
; Rochen Renner, B.
The Childhood Autism Rating Scale.
Lost Angeles,
CA: Western Psychological Services; 1992.
Sheinkopf SJ, Mundy P, Oller DK, Steffens M. Vocal atypicalities of preverbal autistic children.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders.
2000; 30:345–353.
[PubMed: 11039860]
Simon BM, Fowler SM, Handler SD.
Communication development in young children with long-term
tracheostomies: Preliminary report.
International Journal of Otorhinolaryngology.
1983; 6:37–50.
Snow, CE.
Issues in the study of input: fine-tuning universality, individual and devlopmental
differences and necessary causes.
In: MacWhinney, B.; Fletcher, P., editors.
NETwerken:
Bijdragen van het vijfde NET symposium: Antwerp Papers in Linguistics.
Vol.
74.
Antwerp:
University of Antwerp; 1995. p. 5-17.
Sparrow, SS.
; Balla, DA.
; Cicchetti, DV.
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales.
Circle Pines, MN:
American Guidance Service; 1984.
Stark, RE.
Stages of speech development in the first year of life.
In: Yeni-Komshian, G.; Kavanagh, J.;
Ferguson, C., editors.
Child Phonology.
Vol.
1.
New York: Academic Press; 1980. p. 73-90.
Stark, RE.
; Ansel, BM.
; Bond, J.
Are prelinguistic abilities predictive of learning disability?
A follow-
up study.
In: Masland, RL.
; Masland, M., editors.
Preschool Prevention of Reading Failure.
Parkton, MD: York Press; 1988.
Stoel-Gammon C. Prespeech and early speech development of two late talkers.
First Language.
1989;
9:207–224.
Stoel-Gammon C, Otomo K. Babbling development of hearing impaired and normally hearing
subjects.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders.
1986; 51:33–41.
[PubMed: 3945058]
Stoel-Gammon C. Relationships between lexical and phonological development in young children.
Journal of Child Language.
2011; 38(1):1–34.
[PubMed: 20950495]
Teitelbaum P, Teitelbaum O, Nye J, Fryman J, Maurer RG.
Movement analysis in infancy may be
useful for early diagnosis of autism.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America.
1998; 95(23):13982–13987.
[PubMed: 9811912]
Tronick, EZ.
Social interchange in infancy.
Baltimore: University Park Press; 1982.
Van den Dikkenberg-Pot I, Koopmans-van Beinum F, Clement C. Influence of lack of auditory speech
perception of sound productions of deaf infants.
Proceedings of the Institute of Phonetic Sciences,
University of Amsterdam.
1998; 22:47–60.
Vihman, MM.
Phonological Development: The Origins of Language in the Child.
Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell Publishers; 1996.
Volkmar FR, Chawarska K. Autism in infants: An update.
World Psychiatry: Official Journal of the
World Psychiatric Association.
2008; 7(1):19–21.
Watson LR, Patten E, Baranek GT, Boyd BA, Freuler A, Lorenzi J.
Differential associations between
sensory response patterns and language, social, and communication measures in children with
autism or other developmental disabilities.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research.
2011; 54(6):1562–1576.
Patten et al.
Page 22
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Watson LR, Crais ER, Baranek GT, Dykstra JR, Wilson KP.
Communicative Gesture Use in Infants
with and without Autism: A Retrospective Home Video Study.
American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology.
2013; 22:25–39.
[PubMed: 22846878]
Warlaumont, AS.
; Oller, DK.
; Dale, R.; Richards, JA.
; Gilkerson, J.; Xu, D. Vocal Interaction
Dynamics of Children With and Without Autism.
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society; Austin, TX.
2010.
Warren SF, Gilkerson J, Richards JA, Oller DK.
What Automated Vocal Analysis Reveals About the
Language Learning Environment of Young Children with Autism.
Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders.
2010; 40:555–569.
[PubMed: 19936907]
Weismer SE, Lord C, Esler A.
Early language patterns of toddlers on the autism spectrum compared to
toddlers with developmental delay.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders.
2010;
40(10):1259–1273.
[PubMed: 20195735]
Werner E, Dawson G, Osterling J, Dinno N. Brief report: Recognition of autism spectrum disorder
before one year of age: A retrospective study based on home videotapes.
Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders.
2000; 30:157–162.
[PubMed: 10832780]
Wetherby AM, Woods J, Allen L, Cleary J, Dickinson H, Lord C. Early indicators of ASD spectrum
disorders in the second year of life.
Journal of ASD and Developmental Disorders.
2004; 34:473–
493.
Yale ME, Messinger DS, Cobo-Lewis AB, Oller DK, Eilers RE.
An event-based analysis of the
coordination of early infant vocalizations and facial actions.
Developmental Psychology.
1999;
35(2):505–513.
[PubMed: 10082021]
Zwaigenbaum L, Bryson S, Rogers T, Roberts W, Brian J, Szatmari P. Behavioral manifestations of
autism in the first year of life.
International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience.
2005; 23(2–
3):143–152.
[PubMed: 15749241]
Patten et al.
Page 23
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1.
Canonical babbling ratios by participant at 9–12 months
Patten et al.
Page 24
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 2.
Canonical babbling ratios by participant at 15–18 months
Patten et al.
Page 25
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 3.
Syllable volubility by participant at 9–12 months.
Patten et al.
Page 26
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4.
Syllable volubility by participant at 15–18 months.
Patten et al.
Page 27
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 5.
Canonical babbling ratios by age and diagnosis
Patten et al.
Page 28
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 6.
Volubility by age and diagnosis
Patten et al.
Page 29
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Patten et al.
Page 30
Table 1
Participant Demographics
ASD; n=23
TD; n=14
Age at 9–12months; mean (SD)
10.89 (1.39)
10.63 (.53)
Age at 15–18 months; mean (SD)
16.33 (.83)
16.28 (.70)
Sex
19 males, 4 females
11 males, 3 females
Race
23 White, 1 Black
13 White, 1 Asian
Maternal education 1
5.48
5.82
Childhood Autism Rating Scale; mean (SD)
34.17 (1.52)
16.15 (.39)3
1Maternal education: 1=6th grade or lower; 2=7th to 9th grade; 3=partial high school; 4=high school graduate/GED; 5=associate of arts/associate
of science or technical training or partial college training; 6=bachelor of arts/science; 7=master of arts/science or doctorate or other professional
degree completed
2missing information for two participants
3missing information for four participants
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Patten et al.
Page 31
Table 2
Content Variables for Videos, 9–12 months
ASD; mean (SD)
TD; mean (SD)
Number of people present
3.22 (1.53)
3.28 (1.24)
Amount of physical restrictiona
1.58 (.35)
1.51 (.32)
Amount of social intrusiona
2.02 (.38)
2.04 (.32)
Total number of different event types
5.32 (1.05)
5.07 (1.02)
aRated by coders on a 1 to 3 scale
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Patten et al.
Page 32
Table 3
Content Variables for Videos, 15–18 months
ASD; mean (SD)
TD; mean (SD)
Number of people present
2.84 (1.20)
2.82 (1.24)
Amount of physical restrictiona
1.37 (.29)
1.28 (.33)
Amount of social intrusion a
2.06 (.40)
1.95 (.34)
Total number of different event types
5.34 (1.17)
5.23 (1.11)
aRated by coders on a 1 to 3 scale
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Patten et al.
Page 33
Table 4
Percentage of each activity type, 9–12 month videos
ASD; n=23
TD; n=14
Mealtime
10%
11%
Active
53.9%
60.6%
Bathtime
4.5%
5.5%
Other
2.5%
4.1%
special activity
20.3%
16.5%
passive activity
8.7%
3.4%
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Patten et al.
Page 34
Table 5
Percentage of each activity type, 15–18 month videos
ASD; n=23
TD; n=14
Mealtime
7.5%
2.6%
Active
64%
72.8%
Bathtime
2.5%
1.8%
Other
8.3%
11.4%
Special activity
12.9%
4.4%
Passive activity
4.6%
16.6%
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Patten et al.
Page 35
Table 6
Intercorrelations Between Canonical Babbling Ratios and Volubility
1
2
3
4
1.
Canonical Babbling 9–12 mos
__
.352*
.528**
.354*
2.
Volubility 9–12 mos
__
0.21
0.14
3.
Canonical Babbling 15–18 mos
__
.510**
4.
Volubility 15–18 mos
__
*p < .05,
**p < .01
J Autism Dev Disord.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 October 01.
